Add text for SinoVac's vaccine (#890)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines.md

### Viral Vector Vaccines

> <!---- #### COVID-19 Vaccine AstraZeneca --->

Reviewer: Is this the reorganization you referred to?

Author: Yes also creating a new subsection header `#### INO-4800 Vaccine` so that the DNA section followed the same format of background then example vaccines.

I commented out some of the examples since we are a bit pressed for time and so we wanted to at least have 1 vaccine example per section

Reviewer: Got it, thanks!

The CoronaVac vaccine is being developed by SinoVac, a Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company.
The vaccine is using an inactivate whole virus with the addition of an aluminum adjuvant [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.585354].
The vaccine is currently in Phase III clinical trials --> check status.

Pre-clinical trials were performed using BALB/c mice and rhesus macaques [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1932].
The SARS-CoV-2 strains used in this trial isolated from 11 hospitalized patients (5 from China, 3 from Italy, 1 from the UK, 1 from Spain).
A phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the strains were representative of the current circulating variants.
One of the strains, CN2, from China was used as the inactivated and purified virus while the other 10 strains were used to challenge.
The CN2 was grownup in Vero cells.
An ELISA assay was used to assess the immunogenicity of the vaccine.
10 mice were injected with the vaccine on day 0 and day 7 with varying doses (0, 1.5, 3 or 6 &mu;g), and 10 mice were treated with physiological saline as the control.
IgG developed in the serum of all vaccinated mice.
Using the same setup to the immunogenecity was also assessed in macaques.

> 4 macaques were treated with 3 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14.
> 4 macaques were treated with a high does of 6 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14.
> 4 macaques received a placebo vaccine, and another 4 received only the adjuvant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Four macaques were assigned to each of four groups: treatment with 3 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, treatment with a high dose of 6 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, administration of a placebo vaccine, and administration of only the adjuvant.
```
It looked like a poem in the original form!

All vaccinated macaques induced IgGs and neutralizing antibodies.

> After challenge with SARS-CoV-2, strain CN1, vaccinated macaques were protected compared to control macaques (placebo or adjuvant only) based on histology and viral loads collected from different regions of the lung.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After challenge with SARS-CoV-2 strain CN1, vaccinated macaques were protected compared to control macaques (placebo or adjuvant only) based on histology and viral loads collected from different regions of the lung.
```

Phase I/II clinical trials were conducted in adults 18-59 years old [@doi:10/fpcx] and adults over 60 years old [@doi:10/fx8z] in China.
In the case of adults 18-59 years old, a single center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I/II trial was conducted in April 2020.
Patients in this study were recruited from the community in Suining County of Jiangsu province, China.

> For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e. treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e., treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.  
```
Minor stylistic suggestion to match other places where we use i.e.

> This group of 72 participants was split into 2 blocks for low-dose (3 &mu;g) and high-dose (6 &mu;g).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This group of 72 participants was split into 2 blocks for a low-dose (3 &mu;g) and high-dose (6 &mu;g) vaccine.
```
or `low (3 &mu;g) and high (6 &mu;g) dose`

Within each block, participants were randomly assigned vaccination with CoronaVac or placebo (aluminum diluent without the virus) at a 2:1 ratio.
Both the vaccine and placebo were prepared in a Good Manufacturing Practice-accredited facility of Sinovac Life Sciences (Beijing, China).

> The phase II trial followed the same organization of participants, this time using 300 enrolled participants in the 14-day and another 300 enrolled in the 28-day group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The phase II trial followed the same organization of participants, this time using 300 enrolled participants in the 14-day and another 300 enrolled in the 28-day groups.
```

One change of note was that the vaccine was produced using a highly automated bioreactor (ReadyToProcess WAVE 25, GE, Umea, Sweden) to increase vaccine production capacity.
This change resulted in a higher intact spike protein content.
The authors of this study were not aware of this antigen-level difference between the vaccine batches for the phase I/II when the ethical approval for the trials occurred.

To assess adverse responses, participants were asked to record any events up to 7 days post-treatment. 
The reported adverse events were graded according to the China National Medical Products Administration guidelines.
In the phase I trial, the overall incidence of adverse reactions was 29-38% of patients in the 0 to 14 day group and 13-17% in the 0 to 28 day vaccination group.
The most common symptom was pain at the injection site, which was reported by 17-21% of patients in the 0 to 14 day cohort and 13% in the 0 to 28 day cohort.
Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) where patients recovered within 48 hours.

> There was a single case of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours following the first dose of study drug was reported in the 6 &mu;g group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single case of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours following the first dose of study drug was reported in the 6 &mu;g group
```

> Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) in severity and participants recovered within 48 h. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) in severity and participants recovered within 48 hours. 
```

> There was a single case, from the 6 &mu;g group, of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 h after the first dose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There was a single case, from the 6 &mu;g group, of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours after the first dose.
```

Both the 14-day and 28-day cohorts had a strong neutralizing Ab response.

> In a study with older patients (older than 60 years), they performed another single-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase I/II trial [@10/fx8z].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a study with older patients (older than 60 years), they performed another single-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase I/II trial [@doi:10/fx8z].
```

The phase I trial looked at dose escalation using 3 dosages: 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g.
The mean age of participants was 65.8 years (std = 4.8).
Of 95 screened participants, 72 were enrolled.
These 72 participants were split into low (3 &mu;g) and high (6 &mu;g) dose groups.

> Within each groups 24 were treated and 12 were placebo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within each group, 24 participants received the treatment and 12 the placebo.
```

A neutralizing antibody response against live SARS-CoV-2 was detected compared to baseline.
This response was similar across the two dose concentrations.
Additionally, they did not observe a difference in response between age groups (60–64 years, 65–69 years, and ≥70 years).

> In the phase II the mean age was 66.6 years (std = 4.7).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In phase II the mean age was 66.6 years (standard deviation = 4.7).
```
I'm not sure if that acronym is defined, I haven't seen it used much in proposed text, to my recollection!

499 participants were screened and 350 were enrolled.

> 300 were evenly split into 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g dose groups.
> The remaining 50 were assigned to the placebo group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
300 were evenly split into 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g dose groups, and the remaining 50 were assigned to the placebo group.
```

Again, they found a neutralizing antibody response in phase II.

> There wasn't a significant different between the response using 3 &mu;g versus 6 &mu;g, but the response was higher compared to using 1.5 &mu;g.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There wasn't a significant different between the response to 3 &mu;g versus 6 &mu;g, but the response was higher than that to 1.5 &mu;g.
```

Participants were required to record adverse reaction events within the first 7 days after each dose.
The safety results were combined across phage I and II.
All adverse reactions were either mild (grade 1) or moderate (grade 2) in severity.
The most common symptom was pain at the injection site (9%) and fever (3%).
2% (7 participants) reported severe adverse events (4 from the 1.5 &mu;g group, 1 from the 3 &mu;g group, 2 from the 6 &mu;g group), though these were found to be unrelated to the vaccine.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The phase III trials are currently being conducted in Brazil [@doi:10.1186/s13063-020-04775-4].
This is a randomized, multicenter, endpoint driven, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
They are expecting 13,060 participants with 11,800 ages 18 to 59 years and 1,260 age 60+.
Participants will be health care professionals.

> 

Reviewer 2: I would suggest possibly turning this last paragraph into sort of a summary paragraph, where you add a summary sentence or two just to say where things are at as of present and then say that the phase III trial is ongoing

#### SinoVac's CoronaVac

<!--https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(20)30843-4/fulltext-->

> #### Sinopharm (2 candidates)

Author: yes you're right

> The CoronaVac vaccine is being developed by SinoVac, Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CoronaVac vaccine is being developed by SinoVac, a Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company.
```

> The vaccine is currently in Phase III clinical trials --> check status.

Author: Found this right after you did:) thanks for checking

Pre-clinical trials were performed using BALB/c mice and rhesus macaques [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1932].

> The SARS-CoV2 strains used in this trial isolated from 11 hospitalized patients (5 from China, 3 from Italy, 1 from the UK, 1 from Spain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SARS-CoV-2 strains used in this trial isolated from 11 hospitalized patients (5 from China, 3 from Italy, 1 from the UK, 1 from Spain).
```

This only adds up to 10 patients.  Is there one missing?

Author: Ah thanks for checking. I am missing one!

A phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the strains were representative of the current circulating variants.
One of the strains, CN2, from China was used as the inactivated and purified virus while the other 10 strains were used to challenge.
The CN2 was grownup in Vero cells.
An ELISA assay was used to assess the immunogenicity of the vaccine.

> 10 mice were injected with the vaccine on day 0 and day 7 with varying doses (0, 1.5, 3 or 6 &mu;g).
> 10 mice treated with physiological saline as the control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10 mice were injected with the vaccine on day 0 and day 7 with varying doses (0, 1.5, 3 or 6 &mu;g), and 10 mice were treated with physiological saline as the control.
```

IgG developed in the serum of all vaccinated mice.
Using the same setup to the immunogenecity was also assessed in macaques.
4 macaques were treated with 3 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14.
4 macaques were treated with a high does of 6 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14.

> 4 macaques recieve a placebo vaccine or 4 only the adjuvant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4 macaques received a placebo vaccine, and another 4 received only the adjuvant.
```
Is my rephrasing correct?

> All vaccineated macaques induced IgGs and neutralizing antibodies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All vaccinated macaques induced IgGs and neutralizing antibodies.
```

After challenge with SARS-CoV-2, strain CN1, vaccinated macaques were protected compared to control macaques (placebo or adjuvant only) based on histology and viral loads collected from different regions of the lung.

> Phase I/II clinical trials were conducted in adults 18-59 years old[@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30843-4] and adults over 60 years old [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30987-7] in China.
> 
> In the case of adults 18-59 years old, a single center, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I/II trial was conducted in April 2020.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Phase I/II clinical trials were conducted in adults 18-59 years old [@doi:10/fpcx] and adults over 60 years old [@doi:10/fx8z] in China.
In the case of adults 18-59 years old, a single center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I/II trial was conducted in April 2020.
```

Patients in this study were recruited from the community in Suining County of Jiangsu province, China.
For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e. treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.  

> This group of 72 participants were split into 2 blocks for low-dose (3 &mu;g) and high-dose (6 &mu;g).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This group of 72 participants was split into 2 blocks for low-dose (3 &mu;g) and high-dose (6 &mu;g).
```

Within each block, participants were randomly assigned vaccination with CoronaVac or placebo (aluminum diluent without the virus) at a 2:1 ratio.
Both the vaccine and placebo were prepared in a Good Manufacturing Practice-accredited facility of Sinovac Life Sciences (Beijing, China).

The phase II trial followed the same organization of participants, this time using 300 enrolled participants in the 14-day and another 300 enrolled in the 28-day group.
One change of note was that the vaccine was produced using a highly automated bioreactor (ReadyToProcess WAVE 25, GE, Umea, Sweden) to increase vaccine production capacity.
This change resulted in a higher intact spike protein content.

> The authors of this study were not aware of this antigen-level difference between the vaccine batches for the phase I/II when the ethical approval for the trials occured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors of this study were not aware of this antigen-level difference between the vaccine batches for the phase I/II when the ethical approval for the trials occurred.
```

To assess adverse responses, participants were asked to record any events up to 7 days post-treatment. 
The reported adverse events were graded according to the China National Medical Products Administration guidelines.

> In the phase 1 trial, the overall incidence of adverse reactions was 29-38% of patients in the 0 to 14 day group, 13-17% in the 0 to 28 day vaccination group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the phase I trial, the overall incidence of adverse reactions was 29-38% of patients in the 0 to 14 day group and 13-17% in the 0 to 28 day vaccination group.
```

The most common symptom was pain at the injection site, which was reported by 17-21% of patients in the 0 to 14 day cohort and 13% in the 0 to 28 day cohort.

> Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) where parients recovered within 48 hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) where patients recovered within 48 hours.
```

> There was a single case of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours following the first dose of study drug was reported in the 6 μg group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was a single case of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours following the first dose of study drug was reported in the 6 &mu;g group
```

Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) in severity and participants recovered within 48 h. 

> There was a single case, from the 6 &mu;g group, of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 h after the first dose.
> 
> Both the 14-day and 28-day cohorts had a strong neutralizing Ab response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was a single case, from the 6 &mu;g group, of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 h after the first dose.
Both the 14-day and 28-day cohorts had a strong neutralizing Ab response.
```

> In a study with older patients (older than 60 years), they performed another single-centre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase I/II trial [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30987-7].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a study with older patients (older than 60 years), they performed another single-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase I/II trial [@10/fx8z].
```
Should we clarify who "they" refers to?

Author: Yes I can add that

> The phase I trial was looking at dose escalation using 3 dosages: 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The phase I trial looked at dose escalation using 3 dosages: 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g.
```

The mean age of participants was 65.8 years (std = 4.8).
Of 95 screened participants, 72 were enrolled.
These 72 participants were split into low (3 &mu;g) and high (6 &mu;g) dose groups.
Within each groups 24 were treated and 12 were placebo.
A neutralizing antibody response against live SARS-CoV-2 was detected compared to baseline.
This response was similar across the two dose concentrations.
Additionally, they did not observe a difference in response between age groups (60–64 years, 65–69 years, and ≥70 years).

In the phase II the mean age was 66.6 years (std = 4.7).
499 participants were screened and 350 were enrolled.
300 were evenly split into 1.5, 3 and 6 &mu;g dose groups.
The remaining 50 were assigned to the placebo group.
Again, they found a neutralizing antibody response in phase II.

> There wasn't a signficant different between the response using 3 &mu;g versus 6 &mu;g, but the response was higher compared to using 1.5 &mu;g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There wasn't a significant different between the response using 3 &mu;g versus 6 &mu;g, but the response was higher compared to using 1.5 &mu;g.
```

Participants were required to record adverse reaction events within the first 7 days after each dose.
The safety results were combined across phage I and II.
All adverse reactions were either mild (grade 1) or moderate (grade 2) in severity.
The most common symptom was pain at the injection site (9%) and fever (3%).
2% (7 participants) reported severe adverse events (4 from the 1.5 &mu;g group, 1 from the 3 &mu;g group, 2 from the 6 &mu;g group), though these were found to be unrelated to the vaccine.

The phase III trials are currently being conducted in Brazil [@doi:10.1186/s13063-020-04775-4].

> This was a randomized, multicenter, endpoint driven, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a randomized, multicenter, endpoint driven, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
```

10 mice were injected with the vaccine on day 0 and day 7 with varying doses (0, 1.5, 3 or 6 &mu;g), and 10 mice were treated with physiological saline as the control.
IgG developed in the serum of all vaccinated mice.
Using the same setup, immunogenicity was also assessed in macaques.
Four macaques were assigned to each of four groups: treatment with 3 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, treatment with a high dose of 6 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, administration of a placebo vaccine, and administration of only the adjuvant.
All vaccinated macaques induced IgGs and neutralizing antibodies.
After challenge with SARS-CoV-2 strain CN1, vaccinated macaques were protected compared to control macaques (placebo or adjuvant only) based on histology and viral loads collected from different regions of the lung.

Phase I/II clinical trials were conducted in adults 18-59 years old [@doi:10/fpcx] and adults over 60 years old [@doi:10/fx8z] in China.
In the case of adults 18-59 years old, a single center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I/II trial was conducted in April 2020.
Patients in this study were recruited from the community in Suining County of Jiangsu province, China.

> For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e., treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e., treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.
```
EOL character built weird

> #### SinoVac's CoronaVac

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Sinovac's CoronaVac
```

> The CoronaVac vaccine is being developed by SinoVac, a Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CoronaVac vaccine is being developed by Sinovac, a Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company.
```

The vaccine is currently in Phase III clinical trials.

Pre-clinical trials were performed using BALB/c mice and rhesus macaques [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1932].
The SARS-CoV-2 strains used in this trial isolated from 11 hospitalized patients (5 from China, 3 from Italy, 1 from the UK, 1 from Spain, 1 from Switzerland).
A phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the strains were representative of the current circulating variants.
One of the strains, CN2, from China was used as the inactivated and purified virus while the other 10 strains were used to challenge.
The CN2 was grown in Vero cells.
An ELISA assay was used to assess the immunogenicity of the vaccine.
10 mice were injected with the vaccine on day 0 and day 7 with varying doses (0, 1.5, 3 or 6 &mu;g), and 10 mice were treated with physiological saline as the control.
IgG developed in the serum of all vaccinated mice.
Using the same setup, immunogenicity was also assessed in macaques.
Four macaques were assigned to each of four groups: treatment with 3 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, treatment with a high dose of 6 &mu;g at day 0, 7 and 14, administration of a placebo vaccine, and administration of only the adjuvant.

> All vaccinated macaques induced IgGs and neutralizing antibodies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All vaccinated macaques induced IgG and neutralizing antibodies.
```

Phase I/II clinical trials were conducted in adults 18-59 years old [@doi:10/fpcx] and adults over 60 years old [@doi:10/fx8z] in China.
In the case of adults 18-59 years old, a single center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I/II trial was conducted in April 2020.
Patients in this study were recruited from the community in Suining County of Jiangsu province, China.
For the phase I trial, 144 (of 185 screened) participants were enrolled, with 72 enrolled in the 14-day interval cohort (i.e., treated on day 0 and day 14) and 72 in the 28-day interval cohort.  
This group of 72 participants was split into 2 blocks for a low-dose (3 &mu;g) and high-dose (6 &mu;g) vaccine.
Within each block, participants were randomly assigned vaccination with CoronaVac or placebo (aluminum diluent without the virus) at a 2:1 ratio.
Both the vaccine and placebo were prepared in a Good Manufacturing Practice-accredited facility of Sinovac Life Sciences (Beijing, China).

The phase II trial followed the same organization of participants, this time using 300 enrolled participants in the 14-day and another 300 enrolled in the 28-day groups.

> One change of note was that the vaccine was produced using a highly automated bioreactor (ReadyToProcess WAVE 25, GE, Umea, Sweden) to increase vaccine production capacity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One change of note was that the vaccine was produced using a highly automated bioreactor (ReadyToProcess WAVE 25, GE, Ume&aring;, Sweden) to increase vaccine production capacity.
```
I feel obligated to fix the Swedish 😆

In the phase I trial, the overall incidence of adverse reactions was 29-38% of patients in the 0 to 14 day group and 13-17% in the 0 to 28 day vaccination group.
The most common symptom was pain at the injection site, which was reported by 17-21% of patients in the 0 to 14 day cohort and 13% in the 0 to 28 day cohort.
Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) where patients recovered within 48 hours.
A single case of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours following the first dose of study drug was reported in the 6 &mu;g group
Most adverse reactions were mild (grade 1) in severity and participants recovered within 48 hours. 
There was a single case, from the 6 &mu;g group, of acute hypersensitivity with manifestation of urticaria 48 hours after the first dose.
Both the 14-day and 28-day cohorts had a strong neutralizing Ab response.
The neutralizing Ab response was measured using a micro cytopathogenic effect assay, which assesses the minimum dilution of neutralizing Ab to be 50% protective against structural changes in host cells in response to viral infection [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.03.010].

> Additionally IgG antibody tites against the receptor binding domain were also measured using ELISA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally IgG antibody titers against the receptor binding domain were also measured using ELISA.
```
